# Overview

**Surviving our independence**

When Singapore separated from Malaysia in 1965, we had to find ways to survive. We lost our hinterland and we had no natural resources. Strikes and industrial unrest were common in Singapore. Our circumstances worsened in 1968, when the British military announced their withdrawal from Singapore by 1971. Thousands would lose their jobs and a fifth of our nascent economy would be at risk of coming to a halt. To survive as a young country, our leaders had to build the economy by creating favourable conditions for attracting investments and create jobs for our people from scratch.

**Growing our economy**

As a small and open economy, we are dependent on free trade to survive and prosper. Total trade accounts for more than three times our Gross Domestic Product (GDP). We continue to support a rules-based multilateral trading system, i.e., the World Trade Organisation (WTO) which promotes free trade and open markets. At the same time, we work with like-minded partners to establish an extensive network of free trade agreements (FTAs) and on regional economic integration that would maximise opportunities for Singapore’s businesses and create jobs for our people. Starting with the FTA with New Zealand in 1999, we now have 24 implemented FTAs and Economic Partnership Agreements (EPAs) with 36 trading partners globally. To facilitate trade and ensure open connectivity with the rest of the world, we built maritime ports and Changi Airport which over time, had gained world-class status. 

To survive, we also had to buck the trend and do things differently. We needed to be enterprising. We worked hard to create our own industries and promote exports. We actively courted multinational companies (MNCs) to come to Singapore to set up their global and regional hubs in Singapore by offering them attractive incentives. We ensured that political stability, a fair and efficient legal system and first-class infrastructure were well in place to support businesses. In the area of employment standards and labour relations, we revamped our legislation to provide investors with greater assurance of acceptable employment standards and industrial harmony. We championed tripartism to promote a conducive business environment, with industrial relations characterised by cooperation instead of confrontation, to achieve win-win outcomes for all. Tripartism was a part of the critical foundation that supported the success of our economic initiatives and projects.

To support the planning, promotion, development and transformation of our industries, our leaders set up Jurong Town Corporation (JTC) in 1968. Our lack of a hinterland and space did not stop us from dreaming big. In the 1990s, we reclaimed and expanded our south-western islands to create Jurong Island, Singapore’s centrepiece for refining, petrochemical and specialty chemicals activities. Today, Jurong Island is the world’s fifth largest refinery export hub and ranks within the top ten globally by chemical exports volume. As of 2017, Jurong Island produced 0.88% of the world’s high-volume petroleum and petrochemical products. Close to 10,000 people work at Jurong Island, with 8,212 being employed in the energy and chemical sector. As of 2017, the island contributed nearly 3% of Singapore’s GDP, with the industry expected to create S$12.7 billion in value-add and 1,400 new jobs by 2025. We also needed to train our people to ensure that they remained relevant and were able to keep up with the needs of the times. In the early days, most of our people were poorly educated and had only vocational skills. Over time, as Singapore diversified and moved on to more advanced industries like mechatronics, advanced manufacturing, electronics and telecommunications, and software engineering, our education system supported Singapore’s needs by moving from basic education and training to also include advanced training that matched up to international standards to produce highly-skilled manpower today. Over time, Singapore had rapidly grown from a low-income to high-income country.

**Staying exceptional**

Singapore’s economic and income growth remain important for our success and survival as well as quality of life, and help to anchor our country’s security and stability. Singapore has experienced and learnt our lessons well from past economic crises. Looking forward, we face a complex and uncertain global environment. There are rising anti-trade and anti-globalisation sentiments, leading to issues such as the trade conflict between the U.S. and China. We are also seeing emerging trends such as technological disruptions and shifts in the global supply chains which will likely affect our economy and jobs in the longer run. Domestically, a shrinking and ageing workforce compounds the problem. Our economic fundamentals will not change. In an increasingly fragmented world, Singapore must remain stable, safe and attractive to foreign investment and connected to the world. We will continue to be open to opportunities and ideas while being mindful of the risks. We are prepared to help our businesses and people to remain relevant, competitive and resilient, and adapt quickly in a rapidly changing world. We also need to continue building and sustaining tripartite cooperation and trust as our best approach to tackling complex issues that might arise. As a country, what we know for sure is that Singapore needs to continue to stay competitive and relevant to the global economy by embarking on bold initiatives (e.g., Industry Transformation Maps). By being psychologically prepared, continuing to restructure and transform our economy, sharpening our skills and raising our productivity, we can create a vibrant and innovative economy in which Singaporeans can thrive and prosper in all circumstances. 


