# Case Studies

<table>
	<tr>
		<td style="border: 1px solid black; padding: 1rem; margin-top: 1rem">
			<b>Key Messages</b>
			<ul>
				<li>As a small, open economy, Singapore relies heavily on trade to survive and grow. Total trade accounts for more than three times our Gross Domestic Product (GDP). </li>
				<li>We support a rules-based multilateral trading system, i.e., the World Trade Organisation (WTO), that promotes free trade and open markets.</li>
				<li>Since the end of World War II, this system has delivered peace, stability and prosperity to many countries around the world, including Singapore.</li>
				<li>It is important for Singapore, as a global hub, that there continues to be free trade and open markets.  </li>
			</ul>
		</td>
	</tr>
</table>

## The US Trade Conflicts with its Major Trading Partners

In 2018, the United States (US) imposed tariffs on worldwide imports of solar panels and washing machines to safeguard its domestic industries. Subsequently, it invoked steel and aluminium tariffs based on national security reasons. These moves triggered retaliatory measures from the US’ major trading partners such as the European Union (EU), Canada and Mexico. In particular, China was targeted by US trade actions that purported to address “unfair” Chinese trade practices, such as the expropriation of US intellectual property and imposition of stringent restrictions on US investment in China[^1]. 

**Economic Impact on Singapore**

While the direct impact of the US’ tariff on Singapore’s domestic exports to the US (e.g., solar panels, washing machines) is relatively modest at 0.1% of our total domestic exports to the world[^2], Singapore suffers from collateral damage as we are a major player in the global supply chain. For instance, Singapore companies which produce intermediate goods that are used as input in the production of China’s exports to the US may see softer demands for their goods, resulting in reduced business operations and demand for workers. Of greater concern is that any further escalation of tit-for-tat measures will affect business and consumer confidence, leading to a slow-down of the global economy, which will in turn affect Singapore’s economic growth in the longer run. 

<table>
	<tr>
		<td style="border: 1px solid black; padding: 1rem; margin-top: 1rem">
			<b>The Smoot-Hawley Tariff Act (1930)</b>
			<p>The Smoot-Hawley Tariff Act, which was put in place to protect American businesses and farmers, became law in 1930. The Act raised tariffs on more than 20,000 products, and raised the average tariff of goods imported to the US by some 20%. This prompted retaliation from over twenty countries which raised tariff rates. The imposition of the Smoot-Hawley tariff not only adversely affected the US’ economy. The amount of goods that entered the US fell by about 40% over the two years after the imposition of the Smoot-Hawley tariff. Economists and historians regarded the tariff as having exacerbated the Great Depression which started in 1929. It was only till 1934 that the restrictive trade policies were gradually removed that global trade volumes grew.</p>
		</td>
	</tr>
</table>

**Broader Implications for Singapore**

The US and China are the two largest economies and share the most important bilateral relationship in the world, with great impact on our region and elsewhere. The trade conflicts between the US and its major trading partners, including China, will gravely undermine the rules-based multilateral system that has underpinned global prosperity since the end of World War II. Countries around the world, big and small will be hurt, especially a small, open economy such as Singapore, whose survival depends on free trade and open markets.

Beyond the economic loss, strained ties between the US and its major trading partners, including China, mean that we can no longer be sure that the major powers would continue to work together on other pressing issues (e.g., regional security)[^3], or if the existing international system which has held the world together for so long would continue to hold. We do not know if new rules and norms for international cooperation would form, or if there would be prolonged tensions and suspicions, mutual rivalries and hostile blocs[^4]. If the trade conflicts escalate and de-stabilises relations between the US and its major trading partners, there could be disastrous consequences for all countries.

**Government Measures**

Thus far, Singapore has benefited from an open system of global trade. We support the World Trade Organisation (WTO) which obliges countries to reduce tariffs and other trade barriers. Countries which agree to the trade rules are expected to obey them and refrain from sudden actions to restrict trade, such as sharply increasing tariffs. Our economic interests are safeguarded by a strong set of WTO rules and enforcement.

At the same time, Singapore has been and will continue to work with like-minded partners to push for free trade and open markets. We have made much progress in establishing a strong network of free trade agreements (FTAs) and regional economic integration that will maximise opportunities for our companies and create jobs for our people. For instance, Singapore along with 10 other countries signed the Comprehensive and Progressive Agreement for Trans-Pacific Partnership (CPTPP) in March 2018. Together with other ASEAN member states and FTA partners, we are also pressing on with efforts to conclude the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP). By diversifying our export markets, we will become more resilient in facing global economic uncertainties – even if trade with certain countries slow down, we could continue to do business with other countries.

To help businesses and workers remain relevant, competitive and resilient, the government has also provided support on various fronts. For instance, Enterprise Singapore has 37 Overseas Centres and offers various grants to assist Singapore firms to expand overseas and diversify their markets beyond those affected by the trade conflicts. The government has also rolled out Industry Transformation Maps (ITMs) in 23 sectors that cover about 80% of our economy. Each ITM has sector-specific initiatives to improve on areas such as productivity, innovation and skills. Through the SkillsFuture movement, workers can continually upgrade themselves and acquire skills needed for jobs of the future. This will help Singaporeans to become more versatile in their skillsets and stay relevant in the employment market.

**Staying Relevant Amidst Global Uncertainties**

As a country, Singapore needs to continue to stay competitive and relevant to the global economy by being open to opportunities and being aware of the risks that the current trade climate brings. By being psychologically prepared and continuing to build up our economy, sharpening our skills and raising our productivity, we can create a vibrant and innovative economy in which Singaporeans can thrive and prosper in all circumstances.  

<table>
	<tr>
		<td style="border: 1px solid black; padding: 1rem; margin-top: 1rem">
			<p>“We can’t do a lot about it, but we can be psychologically prepared and make sure that we build up our own economy, investments, skills, productivity, upgrading  -  all the mantras and codewords which we do every National Day, but which are in fact eternal, relevant concerns for all Singaporeans if we want to thrive and prosper.”</p>
			<p><i>- Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong speaking to overseas Singaporeans at the Les Salon de l’Hotel des Arts et Metiers in Paris on 14 July 2018</i></p>
		</td>
	</tr>
</table>

[^1]: White House Office of Trade and Manufacturing Policy, How China’s Economic Aggression Threatens the Technologies and Intellectual Property of the United States and the World, June 2018. 
[^2]: Today, US-China Trade War Not Hurting Singapore Much Yet, But Beware the Long Sting in the Tail, 1 July 2018.
[^3]: PM Lee (Washington Post), Nobody Wants a Trade War, 18 April 2018.
[^4]: PM Lee’s speech at National Day Rally 2018 on 19 Aug 2018.