# Singapore's Fundamental Challenges
*X minute read*

<<insert image>>
	
Singapore is limited by its physical constraints. We have a small population and no natural resources or hinterland to depend on. Our small population implies that we have a small workforce and domestic market. A small land mass and lack of natural resources rule out land-intensive economic projects, such as agriculture. There are also competing needs for land, from housing, commercial, industrial, to the military. 

Size also impacts our market size, which is a key consideration for companies – the bigger the market, the better for companies looking to sell their services and products. Singapore’s small market size means that we have made Singapore a compelling investment proposition to potential investors in other ways. These include providing companies and investors with a first-class infrastructure, a well-trained and highly skilled workforce, political stability, a fair and efficient legal system, among others. These have been done with the objective of attracting them here to set up their global and regional hubs in Singapore. We also have to be relevant to the global market so that our  local companies can grow, develop economies of scale and compete effectively overseas. 

While Singapore lacks natural resources, we are strategically located along the Straits of Malacca. With a deep-water harbour that allows for ships to dock and pass through , Singapore is ideally placed to and has become a key trading port in the region. As such, Singapore’s small and economy heavily depends on trade – the volume of trade is three times Singapore’s GDP. 

Despite these realities, we have succeeded because we have used our wits and relied on our determination to overcome the odds. As Education Minister Ong Ye Kung noted in his speech on 3rd December 2019 : 
	
> “Mother Nature dealt us a unique hand: A small island, zero natural resources, but we have a deep-water port at the intersection of global trade routes. She is telling Singaporeans: You make a living by connecting yourself with the rest of the world. You make a living with your wits and your hard work. And so we did.”
> 

	
