# Introduction 

## Imperatives for Singapore’s defence and homefront security

Singapore separated from Malaysia on 9 August 1965. During this period, the Cold War dominated the global geo-political landscape. Within the region, we faced a communist threat and Indonesian Konfrontasi. On the homefront, we experienced the communist-inspired Hock Lee Bus riots in the mid-1950s, and the communalist-based Maria Hertogh riots in 1950 and Sino-Malay riots in 1964. 

In the first two years of our independence, we had no defence to speak of. The Malaysians tried to show us that they were still in charge of our army. This brought home the realisation that being a sovereign country without the ability to defend ourselves was meaningless. Building up our own defence and homefront security forces, the SAF and the Home Team, became our top priority, hastened by the impending British withdrawal in 1971.

## Improvise, adapt and learn

We had to build the SAF from scratch. In 1965, we learnt from the Israelis and set up our defence force based on their experience. In 1967, we introduced national service so that we could raise a credible and sustainable defence force within a short time. When it came to training our servicemen and women, we made do with what we had in the early days, improvising along the way. We started off with simple simulators and as we advanced, we built more complicated equipment to train our people. We established good bilateral relations with like-minded partners so that we could have access to advanced technology and our servicemen and women could train with and learn from the more advanced defence and security forces elsewhere.  In turn, by leveraging on technology and training overseas, we were able to overcome our manpower and land constraints.

We also had to significantly strengthen the Home Team by improving its capabilities and transforming the way it operated. We moved from being just a ministry with various departments dealing individually with different aspects of security, to now operating jointly as one Home Team. In recent times especially, we have significantly stepped up efforts to exploit technology to more effectively deal with security challenges, and make up for fewer boots on the ground. We now deploy unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) and autonomous patrol robots to support ground operations. Surveillance and facial recognition capabilities are deployed at security-sensitive events. We leverage biometrics for more secure immigration clearance. 

Today, the SAF and the Home Team continue to learn and adapt from the best practices of advanced forces, and also develop our own innovations, to ensure that we maintain our fighting edge and the ability to respond quickly and effectively to crises. 

Our defence and security forces also needed leaders. Thus, one of the priorities of our first Defence Minister, Dr Goh Keng Swee (GKS), was to build an Officer Training School, which was completed in 1966. Today, the GKS Command and Staff College in SAFTI Military Institute stands as testimony to remind us to be constantly forward looking. The establishment of the Home Team Academy was a key milestone in raising the capabilities of the Home Team. Its modes of training have evolved to include simulation systems, and augmented and virtual reality to enhance realism. Learning apps enable officers to train-on-the-go, even while at the frontline.

## Rallying our people

In 1984, we introduced Total Defence (TD) – “the national defence concept” that rallies all Singaporeans behind the SAF during hot war, and in peacetime builds up our people’s determination to stand up for Singapore under all circumstances. Our defence and security forces cannot be everywhere all the time to ensure the safety and security of our people and our homes. Everyone has a part to play, and the five pillars of Military, Civil, Economic, Social and Psychological Defence set out the different areas in which we can take action. There is also the SGSecure movement where our homefront agencies partner the community to sensitise, train and mobilise them to help prevent and deal with a terror attack. All these have a deterrence effect in that a potential aggressor would think twice before attacking us, knowing it was up against the entire nation and not just the SAF. 

Dealing with an expanded spectrum of threats.  Looking ahead, the geo-political realities are not going to be any less complex or uncertain,  as the recent bilateral spates that we had with Malaysia and growing tensions between the US and China show. At home, we now face new circumstances and challenges. The population demographics of our national servicemen are evolving. With more transnational marriages and increased overseas exposure amongst our young people, our successive pools of national servicemen will be shaped by different forces and possess different outlooks, aspirations and commitment levels to Singapore’s defence. Where non-conventional threats are concerned, the face of terrorism since the 1990s has changed, and the foiled terrorist attacks against Singapore in 2002 and 2016 showed that the threat of terrorism to Singapore is real. On this front, not only will the SAF and Home Team have to work closely together, but our people will have to play their part as well. With the advent of hybrid warfare, we will need to develop new capabilities and train our people to understand how future conflicts and wars will be fought, and figure out how we can better defend ourselves. The new threats have gone beyond the physical domain, into the digital domain. As Singapore works towards being a Smart Nation, the digital domain now poses a new threat to our safety and security. Our connectedness and multicultural society make us more vulnerable to cyber-security attacks, online falsehoods and digital hostile information campaigns. We will need to put into action the new sixth pillar of Total Defence, known as Digital Defence, to defend ourselves against threats from the digital domain.
