# Case Studies

## Reasons for Updating the Maintenance of Religious Harmony Act (MRHA)

On 24 July, Home Affairs and Law Minister K Shanmugam said that Singapore’s MRHA would be updated, and hinted on a focus on social media platforms such as Facebook and Google, though no clear timeline was given.

- **Reason for the updates.** Minister K Shanmugam explained that as hate speech became more prevalent and could go viral quickly on social media, a “more robust set of tools” would be needed to stop the spread of hate and discord. He talked about how one could express opinions on the Internet anonymously, and be “as nasty as you want”. Similarly, he said state leaders in many countries could make statements “unthinkable a generation ago” to “draw power from and accentuate the deep divisions within society”. Internet companies then spread these under the guise of free speech and profited from increased viewership while “societies are getting damaged and broken”.

- **How the updates will be done.** The government has discussed with different religious leaders and groups, and they “agree with broadly” the direction for the update. Two key aspects will be: to make the law effective against those who make derogatory remarks about religions, and to prevent exploitation of religion for political or subversive purposes.                                                                   

## Key Changes to the MRHA

On 7 October, the Parliament passed changes to the MRHA, which will help Singapore safeguard against and respond more effectively to today’s threats to religious harmony. The key changes include:  

- **Safeguards against foreign influence.** Religious groups will have to: disclose single foreign donations of $10,000 or more; have key leadership positions held by Singapore citizens or PRs; and declare any foreign affiliations. 

- **Restraining orders to take immediate effect,** instead of 14 days, to prevent the spread of offensive statements. 

- **Covering of offences committed overseas,** as long as they target and have an impact on Singapore.

- **Higher maximum punishments.**

