# Creating a Shared Identity as Singaporeans

> “National flags, crest and anthem express symbolically the hopes and ideals of a people… The possession of a national flag and crest is, for a people, symbolic of self-respect.” – Then Minister for Culture, Mr S. Rajaratnam, when presenting the motion on State Arms and Flag and State National Anthem to the Legislative Assembly on 11 November 1959.

For Old Guard leader, Dr Toh Chin Chye, the national flag, crest and anthem were more than just the pride of a newly independent nation. They were important powerful symbols that would help unite Singaporeans. 

“The political purpose was to have a flag around which the three different communities of Singapore can rally around. That is important. And an anthem which everybody can sing and remember,” said Dr Toh, in an interview with the National Archives of Singapore on 23 August 1989. He was tasked to create the symbols back in 1959 when Singapore achieved self-governance. 

He studied the flags of other countries with the intention of creating something unique to Singapore. He eventually settled on the red and white design, with the five stars selected to represent the five values of democracy, peace, progress, equality and justice.

Red was chosen because it symbolised prosperity and happiness, while white – formed when all seven colours of the rainbow are combined – was chosen to symbolise the unity of the different races.  The crescent moon, which represents Singapore as a new nation, was added later because he wanted to “remove any apprehension that we were building a Chinese state”. After all, “there are also five stars on the flag of the People's Republic of China”, he said. 

As a young nation of migrants, the introduction and creation of these symbols marked the first step of a long process towards building a national identity. But unlike other nations which have a far longer history to draw upon to create a shared identity, Singapore could not afford the time to let the process develop naturally, said founding Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew at the City Hall on 3 December 1959.

“I have mentioned these facts to emphasise the urgent need for inculcating common values, common loyalties, common responses amongst our people. The sense of belonging together, belonging to one entity, one unity, is a must in our task of nation building. An old nation with an ancient past has long historic experiences to bind its people together. Indeed, it is their long history that permitted the evolution of a common language and a common cultural heritage. We may not be able to afford such a long time to evolve a common heritage for our people,” he said. 

The task of making a nation fell on the government and the pioneering leaders such as Mr Lee, Dr Toh, then Minister for Culture, Mr S. Rajaratnam, and former Deputy Prime Minister, Dr Goh Keng Swee, among others. They had to forge a sense of unity, shared purpose and, over time, a common destiny to which all Singaporeans could strive towards. 

As a newly independent nation still recovering from the communal tensions and racial riots of the 1950s and 60s, Singapore needed to forge a common identity and sense of belonging among its people.

The idea of a pledge was mooted as a way to inculcate national consciousness and patriotism in schools. Similarly, the national anthem also promotes the coming together of Singaporeans to work towards a common goal: a better future. (Read more about the National Pledge and Anthem [here](https://master.deajq4l3eosv7.amplifyapp.com/04_society/05.html#our-national-pledge-and-anthem).)

### Forging a National Identity

While symbols are relatively straightforward to create, forging a national identity is far more challenging. During the early years of independence, the search for and creation of a Singapore identity had mainly been led by the government. Besides rallying around the national symbols, introducing pledge-taking in schools and playing the national anthem during school assemblies, official state ceremonies and National Day celebrations, the government sought to give Singaporeans a tangible stake in the country’s progress.

In 1964, the government introduced the Home Ownership for the People Scheme to give citizens a tangible asset in the country and a stake in nation-building. Today, about 80 per cent of the population live in Housing Board flats, and a vast majority own their flats, essentially giving them a share in the country’s future. It is an experience that most Singaporeans can relate to. 

“We eat at the nearby hawker centers, we shop at the neighbourhood centers, our children play and grow up together, and we develop a sense of community and belonging. So HDB living is very much an integral part of our national identity and our way of life,” said Minister for National Development Lawrence Wong at the HDB PEAK Forum on 4 September 2018. 

The need to create a Singaporean culture was also a key driving force behind the push to develop a flourishing and vibrant arts scene in the 1990s. Led by Acting Minister for the Arts George Yeo, Singapore built The Esplanade and new museums, as well as set up the National Arts Council. 

But over time it became clear that nation-building was not an exercise that could be solely led by top-down forces. A big part of forging a common identity is in the culture that people share. In Singapore, these include food, music, arts and language. These have slowly evolved over the years as Singaporeans began borrowing from each other’s culture, creating a blend of Malay, Chinese and Indian influences. (Read more about some of our UNESCO bids [here](https://master.deajq4l3eosv7.amplifyapp.com/04_society/05.html#case-study-racial-riots-1964-and-1969).)

The use of a local English slang is an example of being uniquely Singaporean. Singlish, as it is called, clearly distinguishes a Singaporean Chinese from a Chinese person from China – it is a mark of local culture. After all, it is a mix of the various cultures in Singapore.

Singlish grammar mirrors that of Malay, by doing away with most prepositions, verb conjugations, and plural words, while its vocabulary reflects the broad range of the country's immigrant roots. It borrows from Malay, Hokkien, Cantonese, Mandarin and other Chinese languages, as well as Tamil from southern India. (Read more about Singlish and our national identity [here](https://master.deajq4l3eosv7.amplifyapp.com/04_society/05.html#case-study-racial-riots-1964-and-1969).)

Perhaps more importantly, a national identity is needed as a bulwark against forces that may seek to fracture society. For instance, how would Singaporeans react should a crisis hit? Would they fall back into their ethnic groups, or would they stand together as one? This was a conundrum that Mr Goh Chok Tong, then Prime Minister, posed during a parliamentary debate on 5 May 1999.

“In a crunch, where the interests of the tribe and the state diverge, can we be sure that the sense of belonging to a state will be stronger than the primordial instinct of belonging to a tribe?”

Building this sense of belonging, a bond that transcends race and religion, is something that has to be forged through trial and the passage of time, he added.

“We must try and build up this trust. This cannot be done through nice-sounding slogans and motherhood statements. It will be built only when we have gone through fire together, and have helped one another to survive,” said Mr Goh. 

### Standing in Solidarity

Singaporeans united on 23 March 2015, not to fight a battle but to grieve. Singapore’s founding father and first Prime Minister, Mr Lee Kuan Yew, had passed away that morning. Singaporeans from all walks of life attended his wake, taking care of each other as they waited to see him, handing out paper fans, food and drinks paid for from their own pockets. 

Over a week, hundreds of thousands paid their last respects at the Istana and 18 community tribute centres across the island. Queues snaked for miles, with people braving the blazing sun for eight hours or more at times to say their last goodbyes. In grief, Singaporeans showed solidarity. 

On another occasion, Singaporeans joined voices, singing the national anthem with gusto when the public address (PA) system failed at the 2015 Southeast Asian (SEA) Games. It was to be the sixth time that Majulah Singapura sounded through the OCBC Aquatic Centre as Singapore’s swimmers mounted the podium again, this time after winning the women’s 4x200m freestyle relay. However, the PA system crackled and died midway through the national anthem.

Singaporeans in the stands picked up from where the PA system left off, singing even louder, till the end of the national anthem. The heartfelt rendition drew loud applause from the packed arena, with the swimmers visibly moved. 

These experiences not only illustrate the importance of having a national identity but they also build on the collective memories of Singaporeans, thereby strengthening our shared experiences.

In his 2019 National Day Rally speech on the importance of developing a common national consciousness, Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong said that it has taken many years but the concept of being Singaporean is now firmly etched in all Singaporeans.  

Singapore’s forefathers arrived as sojourners. Those from China intended to return to their homeland one day, but in the end, the majority chose to remain. They worked with the government to develop Singapore’s society and economy, and build up the country’s national defence. Gradually, a Chinese Singaporean identity was developed, said PM Lee.

It was the same for Malay and Indian Singaporeans. During the period of anti-colonial struggle, the Indians were inspired by India’s own struggle for independence while the Malays were inspired by the nationalist movements in Indonesia and Malaya. But like the Chinese, they too, along with the Eurasians, progressively sank their roots in Singapore and a Singapore identity was developed. 

Now, as the world enters troubled times, Singapore faces new and daunting challenges. “Being aware of our history, of how we became Singaporean, will help us understand the development of our national consciousness. This in turn will lend us a perspective as we navigate the turbulent voyage ahead,” he said.  

### Finding a Shared Identity with a New Social Mix

Singapore's progress to a global city and international business hub has, however, led to a gradual change in its social mix. In addition to the existing multiracial, multi-religious and multicultural local population, the social fabric now also includes new citizens and foreigners who bring with them different cultures, beliefs and practices.

As PM Lee noted in his National Day Rally speech in 2019, just like Singapore’s forefathers, the immigrants of today have to similarly undergo the process of gradually identifying themselves as Singaporeans, and becoming Singapore citizens.

A study from the United Nations shows that the percentage of migrants in Singapore tripled over the past three decades, growing from 24 per cent (727,000) of the population in 1990 to 37 per cent (2.15 million) in 2019.  The biggest source of migrants come from Malaysia, followed by China, Indonesia, India and Pakistan.

The rising number of inter-ethnic and transnational marriages also added to the complexity of Singapore’s social mix. In 2018, 22.4 per cent of total marriages were between grooms and brides of different ethnic groups, a 16.7 per cent increase from 2008.  Creating a shared identity has gone beyond seeking common ground among the races, but also among new members of society.

Culture, Community and Youth Minister Grace Fu noted at a National Integration Council convention on 3 August 2019 that Singapore’s integration challenges are different today. Singapore has developed a distinct culture, norms and shared values since independence. “As our Singaporean identity became stronger, it has also become easier for us to observe differences in newcomers, rather than what we share in common.” 

Technological and trade disruptions have also fuelled concerns about workplace competition or security, which have made workers question the need for newcomers. Greater connectivity and social media has made it easier for divisive narratives to take root too.

But as a small and open economy with an ageing population, increasing numbers of trans-national families and a low replacement rate, Ms Fu stressed that there is little choice but to continue to keep our doors open. 

“In fact, our openness and ability to work with people from different backgrounds has become our competitive advantage and a strength of our economy. These qualities will help us as we strive to be a hub in areas such as technology, infrastructure development, and research and innovation. We also benefit when people with resources and ideas continue to invest in Singapore, injecting vibrancy in our economy, and creating more opportunities for Singaporeans and our businesses.” she said.

Singapore’s diversity, often framed as a challenge to national identity and social cohesion, can be a source of strength in achieving this, drawn from constantly negotiating and embracing differences. “It hardwires Singaporeans with the instincts for interacting well with international cultures and peoples,” noted the Remaking Singapore Committee in its report submitted to then Prime Minister Goh Chok Tong on 19 June 2003. 

Indeed, Singapore’s approach to new citizens is one of integration, not assimilation, to welcome and not take away, as PM Lee noted, at the official opening of the Singapore Chinese Cultural Centre on 19 May 2019. Being Singaporean, he said, has “never been a matter of subtraction, but of addition; not of becoming less, but more; not of limitation and contraction, but of openness and expansion”. 

To integrate new citizens, Singapore needs to reaffirm and promulgate shared values, find and grow common spaces, share collective experiences and strengthen emotional bonds among its people. Opportunities to interact and understand one another better continue to be key, especially between locals and new citizens. (Read more about the integrating new citizens [here](https://master.deajq4l3eosv7.amplifyapp.com/04_society/05.html#integrating-new-citizens).)






