# Building and Maintaining a Caring Society
“We are one nation together, building a future for ourselves and our people. As we prosper, all communities will progress and no one will be left behind. We will look after the less educated and the elderly who have helped build Singapore. And we must also have a place in our hearts and our lives for the disabled, who are our brothers and sisters too.” – Prime Minister, Mr Lee Hsien Loong, as he was sworn in as Singapore’s third Prime Minister on 12 August 2004.

## Introduction

In the last 15 years, Singapore has increasingly placed more emphasis on creating an inclusive society, continuing with the integration of people of all races but also moving beyond it. Efforts to ensure that people have access to opportunities regardless of age, income or disabilities have been stepped up as new fault lines appear in society, such as growing class divide and widening social inequality.
According to the Institute of Policy Studies’ (IPS), “A Study On Social Capital In Singapore”, released in December 2017, the sharpest social divisions may now be based on class, instead of race or religion. The study found that Singaporeans who live in public housing have fewer than one friend who lives in private housing, and that people who study in elite schools also tend to be less close to those in non-elite schools, and vice versa. 
Professor Tommy Koh, a veteran diplomat and special adviser to the IPS, said at a dialogue ahead of a conference to mark IPS’ 30th anniversary on 25 October 2018, that Singapore might rank among the top in terms of per-capita income, but there are still many Singaporeans who live in poverty. His research estimates that 100,000 to 140,000 households lack the means to pay for their basic human needs.  A new report by the World Economic Forum on social mobility released in January 2020 ranked Singapore 20th out of 82 countries surveyed. Singapore was pulled down by poor performance on fair wage distribution and social protection, in which it was ranked 51st and 61st respectively. 

Singapore’s leaders have acknowledged the potential time bomb. Former Deputy Prime Minister Tharman Shanmugaratnam, at the same IPS conference, said inequality becomes a thornier issue when stagnation in the middle class happens. “Once the escalator that carries everyone up stops, the problems of inequality and all the problems of me-against-you, this-group-against-that-group, become much sharper. And this is exactly what has happened in a whole range of advanced economies.”

Similarly, PM Lee has noted that people will accept differences in backgrounds if they are given the chance to work hard and get better off, which was what the previous generation experienced. “But if it is not like that, if people who are poor say there is no hope, the doors are closed, that they will always remain poor, and their children too, no matter what they do, then I do not think people will accept it,” he said at a closed-door post-National Day Rally dialogue on 14 October 2018. 

For that reason, many government policies are targeted at preventing social stratification, as a means to create an inclusive society. These include a universal health insurance, MediShield Life, which ensures that no one gets saddled with large hospital bills; a range of social assistance schemes to give vulnerable families a leg up; and programmes that help low-skilled workers move up the ranks.

Schemes such as Community Care Endowment Fund (ComCare) and Medifund also target low-income individuals and families. Likewise, SkillsFuture and the Progressive Wage Model provide opportunities for low-wage workers to upgrade their skills and take on more highly skilled work.

The government has also shown no qualms in intervening in any sector to ensure equal opportunities. One example is the preschool sector which, up until 2014, had been entirely private-for-profit or not-for-profit. Today, there are 24 Ministry of Education kindergartens among more than 1,800 childcare centres and kindergartens. They ensure that parents who cannot afford to send their children to a private kindergarten will still have access to a good and affordable pre-school. In fact, the government will double its annual spending on the sector to $1.7 billion in 2022. 

In PM Lee’s swearing-in speech in 2004, he made a commitment to building an inclusive society, with special mention of people with disabilities. A national road map – the Enabling Masterplan – was launched to improve the lives of the disabled and support their caregivers. The first masterplan was unveiled in 2007; the second in 2012. The third, launched in 2019, saw the creation of two new workgroups to help people with special needs live independently and improve their chances of getting a job. One group will look at making it easier to access lifelong learning opportunities and employment pathways, while the second will assess how technology and design in homes and the community help those with special needs live independently. 

Total funding for special education schools have also risen by about 40 per cent over the last five years, ensuring that children and teenagers with intellectual difficulties are able to get an education.  The number of special needs schools now stands at 19, with three more in the works. More mainstream schools are also opening their doors to students with mild special needs, with the help of allied educators. Currently, 20 per cent of students with special needs are in special education schools, with the rest, or 26,000 students, in mainstream schools. This figure has doubled from 13,000 in 2013. 

But while the government’s social provisions have broadened, they remain anchored in the basic principles of self-reliance, individual effort and personal responsibility. As former DPM Tharman famously told a BBC presenter on 7 May 2015, who had pressed him on the concept of a safety net: “I believe in the notion of a trampoline.” Social assistance in Singapore is not supposed to provide for a comfortable life but is meant to spur citizens on to get back on their feet.

Relying on government support alone is also insufficient. PM Lee in his 2012 National Day Rally speech noted that there is also a need to “maintain a sense of mutual responsibility amongst ourselves and especially on the part of those who are more successful than others”. 

Indeed, charities like Temasek Foundation and Lien Foundation have stepped up. Temasek Foundation has funded initiatives that include offering mothers from vulnerable families a community health and social care support system from pregnancy until their child is three, and empowering children from low-income families to chase their dreams in dance and art. Meanwhile Lien Foundation has been investing in the eldercare sector, creating more centres for seniors to exercise, undergo health checks or socialise, as well as more quality nursing homes equipped with facilities such as a gym and cafe. 

## Case Study: Striving towards a Multi-Abled Singapore

A supermarket with lower checkout counters for wheelchair users and magnifying glasses for the visually impaired to read labels more easily is just one of the facilities at the Enabling Village. Here people with and without disabilities are accepted for who they are.

Located near Redhill MRT station, the $25 million set-up opened in 2015. It has food outlets run by Soul Food and Shatec, which hire people with disabilities, and an art gallery where visitors can buy artworks and merchandise designed by people with autism.

To boost the job prospects of people with disabilities, it also has an information and career centre, as well as training facilities such as a mock hotel room where they can learn housekeeping. A range of training courses is also offered. 

As Singapore strives to be more inclusive, there have been more initiatives that not only cater to people of all needs and abilities but also encourage interaction among them.

Another example is Kindle Garden, an inclusive preschool that is the first of its kind in Singapore. It enables children of all abilities, from mainstream ability children to those with severe needs, to learn and play together. About 30 per cent of the 80 or so children currently enrolled at the preschool, which is run by non-profit AWWA, have special needs such as autism, Down Syndrome or cerebral palsy. 

This mindset has extended to the workplace, such as at Foreword Coffee. The specialty coffee company has a social mission – to empower people with special needs by giving them jobs and equipping them with barista skills.

The work processes at their cafés are split into four stations so that each employee can focus on just one task. The coffee machine for Foreword Coffee’s third outlet, at Temasek Shophouse, also uses a switch that can be flipped easily instead of the more conventional knob. It was bought specially for staff with health conditions such as cerebral palsy, who do not have enough strength in their arms.

In 2019, out of 18 staff members across three outlets – at the Civil Service College, Centre for Healthcare Innovation at Tan Tock Seng Hospital and Temasek Shophouse – 14 have special needs such as autism, cerebral palsy and hearing impairment. The company is looking to set up its fourth outlet, given the long list of job applicants.

“There is a pool of talent waiting to be tapped on. We are proof that they not only have the ability to work, but also work well,” said Foreword Coffee director Nadi Chan. 

## Acts of Care
Singaporeans have also shown themselves to be big-hearted. In March 2003, Singapore faced a test of resilience which highlighted the importance of national identity.

A deadly then-unknown virus made its way from Hong Kong to Singapore via a Singaporean former flight attendant. Within a month, the virus – later named the severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) – spread to over 100 people on the island, killing four.  There was widespread fear in dealing with the deadly disease. Alarm and panic soon turned into discrimination against healthcare workers.

Taxis and buses refused to stop at Tan Tock Seng Hospital (TTSH), the designated screening and treatment centre for SARS. Neighbours did not want to ride the lift with nurses. Queues at food courts would quickly shorten when a nurse joined the line.  When Dr S. Balaji, a former neurosurgeon and then Minister of State for Health, heard about these incidents at a dialogue with TTSH staff, he decided to take action. Ministers highlighted the plight of healthcare workers to the media, and almost overnight, a groundswell of goodwill was created. 
There was an outpouring of tributes to healthcare workers on the SARS frontline, with some Singaporeans writing in to forums to condemn discriminatory behaviour towards them, while others sent food, drinks and bouquets to TTSH.

Singaporeans also expressed support for their work with initiatives such as the Peach Ribbon Campaign, in which members of the public wore peach satin ribbons to show appreciation for healthcare workers. Those who got the ribbons were encouraged to make a small donation to the Courage Fund, which was set up to provide relief to SARS victims and healthcare workers. In less than two months, the campaign raised $322,121 for the fund.

When the transboundary haze from Indonesia hit Singapore in 2015, the worst episode in recent years where Pollutant Standard Index readings hit hazardous levels forcing schools to shut, local kindness movement “Stand Up For Singapore” started a fund-raising campaign called “I Will Be Your Shelter”. Their aim was to buy air purifiers and filters for the elderly and needy in the North Bridge Road area. The campaign raised over $6,000. Another Singaporean, Mr Cai Yinzhou, started the “3000 masks, 1 Singapore” project, where he distributed masks to the elderly and migrant workers, while a hardware store at Block 442, Clementi Avenue 3 was spotted bearing a sign in English and Chinese that read: “Free mask for children and senior citizens.”  

Similarly in 2020, as the world fought to control and contain the Covid-19 pandemic, Singaporeans once again stepped up to help others. One Singaporean couple gave out 6,600 surgical masks for free when they saw how Singaporeans were scrambling to find masks.  While another couple made their own alcohol-based hand sanitiser, sharing it with their neighbours by placing a bottle of it at their block’s lift. 

Crises aside, Singaporeans also have the capacity to show love to those struggling in their daily lives. One couple even opened their home to young people in need, quitting their jobs in the process. Mr Kenneth Thong and his wife, Adeline, started The Last Resort, running it out of a rented Seletar four-storey terraced house. The young adults who stay with them could be unwed mothers, homeless teenagers or those with mental problems. Most are from dysfunctional families and have nowhere else to go, and many are too old for institutional care or fostering. “We want them to experience what a normal, safe, functional family looks like. And that means they are free to have whatever we have here,” said Mr Thong in an interview with The Straits Times in 2018. 

However, to encourage those who are better off to look out for and help those who are with less, there is a need to get people to mix across class lines. As the researchers behind “A Study On Social Capital In Singapore” by the IPS released in 2017 said: “Having a diverse network (whether on race, religion or status) increases the variety and richness of one's experiences and knowledge beyond one’s own group, and this facilitates thinking in national terms, rather than narrowly in terms of only one's own group and its interests.”

Professor Vincent Chua, one of the researchers behind the study, added: “What starts as a person-to-person relationship leads to benefiting the larger society. We build a society, one tie at a time.”

Indeed, the grassroots organisations have been working to tear down metaphorical fences between those living in public and private homes by creating opportunities for social mixing. In June 1998, the People's Association formed Neighbourhood Committees within private estates to promote active citizenry and neighbourliness, as what the Residents' Committees in HDB zones do. Joint activities for both groups have been regularly organised. 

Sports have been another rallying point. Recognising that sports bring people of various backgrounds together, regardless of school, job or income level, the government has ensured that joining sports clubs at community centres is free. 

The Ministry of Education has taken some steps to address the disproportionate number of students from more well-off families in brand-name schools. Since 2014, all primary schools are required to keep at least 40 places for children with no connections to the school, such as a sibling or parent who is an alumnus. From 2019, one-fifth of places in secondary schools that are affiliated to primary schools have been set aside for students who do not benefit from affiliation priority. 

## Case Study: Volunteerism in Singapore: Helping Those in Need

As Singapore approached the second millennium, it faced a new crisis: an ageing population.

The average life expectancy of a Singaporean had increased to 78 in 2000, and in the same year, birth rates had plunged to just 1.6.     The number of seniors living here is also set to double to around 900,000 by 2030. 

The burden on the working population will only increase, even as its size shrinks. Getting able-bodied seniors to help their peers in need is one way around the problem. And so elderly volunteerism took root in Singapore.

In countries like the United States, it is common for the elderly in states like New York and Louisiana to help others with tasks such as financial management and handicrafts under a movement called Retired and Senior Volunteer Programme (RSVP).    

In 1998, then Prime Minister Goh Chok Tong, impressed by the success and influence of the movement, launched the Singapore chapter of RSVP. 

Explaining its significance, he said: “Singapore’s main asset, its human resource, is becoming better trained and more valuable. Hence, we should devise innovative ways to better utilise it. One way is to stretch the productive life expectancy of Singaporeans beyond their formal retirement. This is where RSVP can help, by providing older Singaporeans an avenue to actively contribute their life's experiences.”
Between 2018 and 2019, the non-profit organisation, made up of purely senior volunteers, helped 172,221 beneficiaries.  It has close to 2,500 members today, up from 824 in 2016. 

This supports an upward trend in volunteerism in Singapore, especially among retirees. In a National Volunteer and Philanthropy Centre survey published in May 2017, the number of volunteers aged 55 to 64 increased from 18 per cent in 2014 to 20 per cent in 2016. The total number of volunteers almost doubled between 2014 and 2016.

However, Singapore’s national volunteerism rate still stands at just 29 per cent, compared with 35 per cent in 2016 – a drop of six percentage points. On 5 June 2018, Minister for Culture, Community and Youth Grace Fu said during a keynote address during an Asian Venture Philanthropy Network's (AVPN) conference that the government is looking to boost volunteerism rates to 70 per cent by 2023. 

In 2019, SG Cares, a national movement to promote volunteerism, was launched. The Ministry of Culture, Community and Youth partnered community groups to establish Volunteer Centres, which aid in volunteer matching, deployment and training. In addition, an SG Care app was developed to allow volunteers to find volunteering opportunities more easily, such as by allowing them to choose their preferred timings or propose or collaborate on projects to help those in need.

These efforts have continued into 2020. Budget 2020 has set aside $350m in the newly established Community Capability Trust, which social service agencies can tap into. A Bicentennial Community Fund, too, will further assist institutes of public characters (IPC). Together, the government hopes to cultivate a “giving culture”.

Said Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong at the opening of the National Volunteer and Philanthropy Centre’s The Giving Place on 7 July 2008: “We have to get our people to do their best, do well for themselves, and so help the whole country to progress. Our system makes full use of the talent and entrepreneurial drive of our citizens, and this has delivered growth and improved the lives of all citizens. But for this to be sustainable, our society has to remain cohesive and stable, and that means that those who have succeeded must feel the impulse to give back to society.”   

## Conclusion
However, even as government agencies work hard to boost interaction in schools, community organisations and neighbourhoods, social cohesion will require Singaporeans to make an effort to reach out to others. It all boils down to creating a community that cares and people who can help each other when the need arises.

As PM Lee put it in his National Rally Speech on 18 August 2013: “Today, the situation has changed. If we rely too heavily on the individual, their efforts alone will not be enough, especially among the vulnerable like the low- income families, like the elderly. And there are some things which individuals cannot do on their own and there are other things which we can do much better together. So we must shift the balance.” 

From providing equal rights to people of all races and religions, to forging a national identity that brings Singaporeans together, and building a society that is inclusive and caring. The journey towards a Singapore that will stay united against all odds is one that is still in progress. 




